# 1.3 Go Fundamentals

In this section, we will explore the core building blocks of the Go programming language, including data types, variables, control structures, functions, packages, structs, and interfaces. Understanding these fundamentals will provide a solid foundation for using Go in API development.

## Data Types and Variables in Go
Go is a statically typed language, which means that the data type of a variable must be explicitly specified at compile time. Some of the basic data types in Go include:
-	Numeric types: int, float32, float64 etc.
-	Boolean type: bool
-	String type: string

To declare a variable in Go, you can use the `var` keyword, followed by the variable name and its type. You can also use the short variable declaration syntax, which uses the `:=` operator to infer the type automatically based on the initial value.

```go
var age int = 30
name := "John Doe"
```

## Control Structures: Loops, Conditionals and Error Handling

### Loops 

Go has a single looping construct, the `for` loop, which can be used in various forms to implement different types of loops, such as counting loops, conditional loops, and infinite loops.

```go
for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
    fmt.Println(i)
}

for someCondition {
    // Loop body
}

for {
    // Infinite loop
}
```
 
### Conditionals
Go supports the standard `if`, `else if`, and `else` constructs for conditional branching, as well as the switch statement for multiple branching based on a single expression.

```go
if condition {
    // If block
} else if anotherCondition {
    // Else if block
} else {
    // Else block
}

switch someValue {
case "value1":
    // Case block
case "value2":
    // Case block
default:
    // Default block
}
```

### Error Handling
Go encourages explicit error handling using multiple return values and the error type. Functions that can result in an error return an additional value of the error type, which can be checked and handled accordingly.

```go
func divide(a, b float64) (float64, error) {
    if b == 0 {
        return 0, errors.New("division by zero")
    }
    return a / b, nil
}

result, err := divide(10, 2)

//error handling
if err != nil {
    fmt.Println("Error:", err)
} else {
    fmt.Println("Result:", result)
}
``` 
## Functions and Packages

### Functions

Functions in Go are declared using the `func` keyword, followed by the function name, parameters, and return types. Functions can return multiple values, which is a useful feature for error handling, as seen in the previous example.
 
```go
func add(a int, b int) int {
    return a + b
}
```

### Packages
Go organizes code into packages, which serve as modular units of code reuse. A package is a collection of source files in the same directory that share a common package declaration. The `main` package is the entry point of a Go program, and the `main` function within it is executed when the program runs.
To import and use a package, you can use the `import` keyword, followed by the package name. Functions and types exported from a package are capitalized, while unexported ones are lowercase.

```go
import (
    "fmt"
    "math"
)

func main() {
    fmt.Println(math.Sqrt(4))
}
``` 
## Structs and interfaces

### Structs

A struct is a composite data type that groups together variables of different data types under a single name. Structs are useful for representing complex data structures and can have methods associated with them. To define a struct, use the `type` keyword, followed by the struct _name_ and the `struct` keyword.

```go
type Person struct {
    Name string
    Age  int
}

func (p Person) SayHello() {
    fmt.Printf("Hello, my name is %s and I'm %d years old.\n", p.Name, p.Age)
}

func main() {
    person := Person{Name: "John Doe", Age: 30}
    person.SayHello()
}

```
 
### Interfaces

An interface in Go is a type that defines a set of methods. It provides a way to specify the behavior of an object without specifying its implementation. Interfaces are used for achieving polymorphism and decoupling dependencies between packages. To define an interface, use the `type` keyword, followed by the interface name and the `interface` keyword.

```go
type Writer interface {
    Write([]byte) (int, error)
}

func SaveData(w Writer, data []byte) {
    w.Write(data)
}

func main() {
    // Implementation of Writer interface
    type FileWriter struct{}

    func (fw FileWriter) Write(data []byte) (int, error) {
        // Write data to a file
    }

    fileWriter := FileWriter{}
    data := []byte("Hello, world!")
    SaveData(fileWriter, data)
}
```
 
### Reserved keywords

Reserved keywords in Go are predefined words that have special meanings within the language. They are used to define the structure and syntax of Go programs and cannot be used as identifiers for variables, constants, functions, or types. It's important to familiarize yourself with these keywords to avoid naming conflicts and to better understand Go code.

There are 25 reserved keywords in Go:
1.	**break**: Terminates the innermost enclosing for, switch, or select statement.
2.	**default**: Specifies the default case in a switch statement.
3.	**func**: Used to declare a function.
4.	**interface**: Defines an interface type.
5.	**select**: Used for concurrent communication between Goroutines through channels.
6.	**case**: Represents a single case in a switch statement.
7.	**defer**: Schedules a function call to be executed after the surrounding function returns.
8.	**go**: Creates a new Goroutine to run a function concurrently.
9.	**map**: Declares a map data structure.
10.	**struct**: Defines a composite data type with a collection of fields.
11.	**chan**: Declares a channel for communication between Goroutines.
12.	**else**: Represents the alternative branch in an if statement.
13.	**goto**: Creates an unconditional jump to a labeled statement within the same function.
14.	**package**: Declares a package, serving as a modular unit of code reuse.
15.	**switch**: Provides multiple branches of execution based on a single expression.
16.	**const**: Declares a constant value.
17.	**fallthrough**: Allows the execution to continue to the next case in a switch statement.
18.	**if**: Defines a conditional statement.
19.	**range**: Provides a way to iterate over elements in a variety of data structures, such as arrays, slices, and maps.
20.	**type**: Declares a new type.
21.	**continue**: Skips the rest of the current iteration in a loop and proceeds to the next iteration.
22.	**for**: Represents a loop construct.
23.	**import**: Imports a package to be used in the current file.
24.	**return**: Returns a value from a function and terminates its execution.
25.	**var**: Declares a variable.

### Predeclared Identifiers
Predeclared identifiers in Go are built-in functions, types, and constants that are globally available and do not require importing a package. They provide essential functionalities and common data types for writing Go programs. While it's possible to redefine predeclared identifiers in your code, it's generally not recommended, as doing so can lead to confusion and unexpected behavior.

There are three categories of predeclared identifiers in Go:

**1. Built-in Functions**

Go includes several built-in functions that provide essential operations on various data types. 

Some common built-in functions are:
- **make**: Allocates and initializes a slice, map, or channel.
- **new**: Allocates memory for a new value of the specified type and returns a pointer to it.
- **panic**: Stops the ordinary flow of control and begins panicking.
- **recover**: Regains control of a panicking Goroutine.
- **append**: Appends elements to the end of a slice, possibly resizing it.
- **copy**: Copies elements from one slice to another.
- **delete**: Removes the entry with the specified key from a map.
- **len**: Returns the number of elements in a collection (e.g., array, slice, map, or string).
- **cap**: Returns the capacity of a slice or a channel.
- **close**: Closes a channel, signaling that no more values will be sent on it.
- **complex**, **imag**, **real**: Functions for working with complex numbers.
- **print**, **println**: Functions for printing to the standard output.

**2. Built-in Types**
   
Go has several built-in types that are globally available. 

Some common built-in types are:

- **Basic types**: bool, byte, rune, int, int8, int16, int32, int64, uint, uint8, uint16, uint32, uint64, uintptr, float32, float64, complex64, complex128, and string.
- **Aggregate types**: array, slice, struct, map, and channel.
- **Reference types**: pointer, function, and interface.
- **error**: A built-in interface type for representing error conditions.
  
**3. Built-in Constants**
   
Go has a few built-in constants that represent untyped numeric values:
- **true** and **false**: The boolean constants representing true and false, respectively.
- **iota**: A special constant that can be used in const declarations to create incrementing integer values. It starts at 0 and increments by 1 for each item in a const block.


By understanding these Go fundamentals, including data types, variables, control structures, functions, packages, structs, and interfaces, you will be well-equipped to use Go for API development. In the following sections, we will explore more advanced concepts and techniques specific to API development in Go, such as working with the standard library, setting up a development environment, and building a basic API.
