# 4.2: Building APIs with Gorilla Mux
**Gorilla Mux** is a popular library among Go developers due to its robust routing capabilities, making it an excellent tool for building APIs. Let's dive deeper and understand how to use it.

## Getting Started with Gorilla Mux

First, you need to install the library. Use the following command in your terminal to get it:


```shell
go get -u github.com/gorilla/mux
```
Once you've got **Gorilla Mux** installed, you can import it into your project as follows:

```go
import (
	"github.com/gorilla/mux"
)
```

## Creating a New Router

To start using **Gorilla Mux**, you'll need to create a new router. This is straightforward:

```go
r := mux.NewRouter()
```

## Defining Routes

With **Gorilla Mux**, you can define routes for your API with various HTTP methods like **GET**, **POST**, **PUT**, **DELETE**, etc. For instance, if you want to create a route for fetching user data, you might do something like this:

```go
r.HandleFunc("/users/{userID}", getUser).Methods("GET")
```

In the above example, `{userID}` is a variable part of the URL path. You can access its value in your handler function like this:

```go
func getUser(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	vars := mux.Vars(r)
	userID := vars["userID"]
	// Now do something with the userID
}
```

## Handling HTTP Methods and Headers

**Gorilla Mux** allows you to match routes based not only on the path but also the HTTP method, the domain, the path prefix, the scheme (http or https), and even the headers. For instance:

```go
r.HandleFunc("/users/{userID}", updateUser).Methods("PUT").Headers("Content-Type", "application/json")
```

## Starting the Server

Finally, you can start your server using the `http.ListenAndServe` function:

```go
http.ListenAndServe(":8000", r)
```

## Middleware in Gorilla Mux

The Middleware in **Gorilla Mux** can be configured by using the `Use()` function, which adds middleware to the router. Middleware is a chain of handlers that you can use to process a request before it reaches your final route handler function.

A Middleware in **Gorilla Mux** is defined as a function that take a `http.Handler` instance as input and return a new `http.Handler` that can chain the execution of multiple handlers together.

Here's an example of a middleware function that logs the start and end time of a request:

```go
func loggingMiddleware(next http.Handler) http.Handler {
    return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        // Do stuff here
        start := time.Now()

        // Call the next handler, which can be another middleware or the final handler.
        next.ServeHTTP(w, r)

        // Do stuff after calling the next handler
        fmt.Printf("Request processed in %s\n", time.Since(start))
    })
}
```

This middleware can be added to the router like so:

```go
r := mux.NewRouter()
r.Use(loggingMiddleware)
```

Now, every request that hits your server will be processed by `loggingMiddleware`, which will log the time it takes to process the request.

The order in which middleware is added to the router matters. The middleware that is added first will be the first to process the request and the last to process the response. So, if you have multiple middleware, the order in which they are added determines the order in which they process the request and response.

> Remember, middleware functions are called in the order they are added to the router for a request, and in reverse order for a response. This means that the first middleware added will be the last one to process the response.


***

With these basics, you should be able to start building an API with **Gorilla Mux**. Of course, there's a lot more to the library than we've covered here, but this should provide a solid foundation for further exploration.

[<< Previous page](4.1-introduction-to-go-libraries-and-tools-for-APIs.md) | [Back to chapter summary](Readme.md) | [Next page >>](4.3-building-apis-with-gin.md)