# 4.3: Building APIs with Gin

**Gin** is a high-performance web framework for Go. It offers a robust, flexible foundation for creating APIs, featuring an intuitive API, middleware support, routing, data binding, and more. In this chapter, we'll explore the Gin framework and its key advantages, guide you through setting up an API using Gin, and delve into how middleware works within the framework.

## Exploring the Gin Framework and Its Advantages

**Gin**, like many Go frameworks, is designed for speed. It's built to handle a high volume of requests with minimal overhead, making it an excellent choice for developers building performant APIs.

Beyond performance, Gin also provides:

- A straightforward and expressive API, which allows you to quickly define routes and handlers.
- Powerful middleware support, enabling pre- and post-processing of requests.
- Convenient error handling mechanisms.
- Data binding and validation capabilities, simplifying the process of parsing and validating incoming data.

## Setting Up and Creating APIs using Gin

To start using Gin, you need to install it. This can be done using the following command:

```shell
go get -u github.com/gin-gonic/gin
```

Once installed, you can import Gin into your project:

```go
import "github.com/gin-gonic/gin"
```

Creating a new Gin instance and defining routes is simple:

```go
r := gin.Default() // creates a router with default middleware: logger and recovery (crash-free) middleware

r.GET("/users/:id", func(c *gin.Context) {
    id := c.Param("id")
    // Fetch user with this ID and return them
})

r.Run() // starts the server on port 8080
```

In this example, we've created a new router with **Gin**'s default middleware (a logger and recovery middleware to handle panics), defined a GET route for fetching users by ID, and started the server.

## Middleware in Gin

Middleware is a key component of Gin. Middleware functions are executed before the final handler is called. They are perfect for logging, handling errors, validating data, and more.

Defining middleware in Gin is straightforward. Here's an example of a simple logging middleware:

```go
func loggingMiddleware(c *gin.Context) {
    startTime := time.Now()

    // Pass to the next middleware or handler function
    c.Next()

    // After request handling
    duration := time.Since(startTime)
    log.Println("Duration:", duration)
}
```

To use this middleware, simply add it to the **Gin** engine using the Use() function:

```go
r := gin.New()
r.Use(loggingMiddleware)
```

In this configuration, `loggingMiddleware` will be called before every route handler. If you want to use a middleware for specific routes, you can add it to those routes individually:

```go
r.GET("/users/:id", loggingMiddleware, getUserHandler)
```

[<< Previous page](4.2-building-apis-with-gorilla-mux.md) | [Back to chapter summary](Readme.md) | [Next page >>](4.4-building-apis-with-echo.md)